# Pneumonia_Classification
DS 4400 (Machine Learning and Data Mining 1) Final Project Spring 2023

<b> Title: </b> Pneumonia Classification

<b> Abstract: </b> In several sentences, summarize your project (e.g., think of a Tweet).
## Introduction:
<p> Pneumonia is a medical condition characterized by inflammation of the air sacs (alveoli) in one or both lungs, usually caused by a bacterial, viral, or fungal infection. The inflammation causes the air sacs to fill with pus or other fluid, which can make it difficult to breathe and lead to symptoms such as coughing, fever, and chest pain.  One way to detect pneumonia is through chest x-rays. A chest X-ray can help detect pneumonia by showing the inflammation and fluid buildup in the lungs. An X-ray classifier would be a helpful tool for the healthcare industry. For one, it can allow for early detection: Pneumonia can be difficult to diagnose in its early stages, as its symptoms are similar to those of other respiratory illnesses. When caught early, patient outcomes are likely to be better. Secondly, it would be an efficient diagnosis: an X-ray classifier can quickly and accurately diagnose pneumonia by analyzing chest X-rays. This can save time and resources compared to traditional diagnostic methods, such as laboratory tests, which can be time-consuming and expensive.</p>
<p> Creating an X-ray classifier is an intesting problem for many reasons. More industries are starting to take advantage of artificial intelligence and machine learning including the healthcare industry. X-ray classifiers are already being used in healthcare and are likely to become increasingly common in the future. A recent study found that an X-ray classifier for pneumonia had an accuracy rate of 93.3%, compared to 90.3% for radiologists. We found this stat to be reflective of what the future of healthcare will look like. Working to create an X-ray classifier for pneumonia means we are working on something that is likely to be heavily used in the real world.</p>
<p> The approach we decided to take for creating an X-ray classifier for pneumonia was through neural networks. Neural networks are used in X-ray classifiers for pneumonia because they are well-suited to the task of image recognition and classification. In the case of X-ray classifiers for pneumonia, neural networks can be trained on large datasets of chest X-rays to learn how to identify the characteristic patterns and features associated with the disease. The neural network can then use this knowledge to analyze new X-ray images and classify them as either showing signs of pneumonia or not.
Neural networks are particularly effective at image recognition and classification because they can learn to identify complex patterns and relationships in data, even when those patterns are not immediately obvious to human observers. Neural networks are great for images because they can automatically extract and analyze features and patterns in image data. Images contain large amounts of complex data, and the other types of methods we learned in class may struggle to effectively analyze and classify them. By analyzing images at multiple levels of abstraction, neural networks can accurately classify images even when they contain significant variability or noise. </p>
<p> Neural networks are better than regression and tree methods for classifying images because of their ability to learn complex relationships between features in the image. Our X-rays may be in black and white but there relationships between the features can be highly nonlinear and difficult to model using traditional statistical methods like regression or decision trees. Neural networks are specifically designed to handle high-dimensional data and can learn to identify patterns and features in the data that are important for image classification. They are able to automatically extract features from the raw pixel data using convolutional layers, which are specialized layers in the neural network that learn to detect local patterns in the image. This allows the neural network to capture the most salient features of the image, regardless of their location in the image.</p>
<p> Our approach was to start by creating a simple two-layer neural network to start with and try different activation functions such as ReLU and Thanh. From here we would pick the best one and try adding more hidden layers to our model. We also wanted to try using Convolutional Neural Networks  since CNNs are designed to handle high-dimensional data, such as images or videos. They use convolutional layers to learn local features, such as edges and textures, and pooling layers to downsample the data and reduce the number of parameters in the network. This allows them to capture the hierarchical structure of the data and make accurate predictions on complex image and video processing tasks. Lastly, we thought about applying image processing on our dataset to see if our results could improve. Through sharpening and blurring we can train our dataset to better handle X-rays, however, the added noise has the potential to negatively impact our accuracy. </p>
<p> Our main limitations include computational power and smaller dataset. Our dataset for training has about 5,000 images which will limit our accuracy. Some other limitations include interpretability and overfitting. It is difficult the interpret how our neural network is classifying our images and what is uses to detect pneuomnia in the X-rays. With overfitting, we have concern since our pneumonia x-rays aren't clear and come be considered "cloudy." This might be interpretted as noise in our pictures and disrupt of model from properly learning.  </p>

## Setup:
<p> Our dataset consisted of images of X-rays where the patient didn't have pneumonia or had bacterial or virual pneumonia. We had 1,341 cases of no pneumonia patient X-rays and 3,875 cases of pneumonia X-rays in our train dataset. We had 234 cases of no pneumonia patient X-rays and 390 cases of pneumonia X-rays in our test dataset. This gave us a 10.68% test-train split. Our X-rays without pneumonia look tend to be more clear in the chesr area, while X-rays with pneumonia can be considered "cloudy." However, at first glance at the images there doesn't appear to be much of a difference.</p>
<p> For our experiment we setup our neural network in python and opted to use machine learning library PyTorch since we had experience using it in our homework assignments. We setup our model in a Jupyter notebook so we wouldn't have to rerun entire files as we worked on creating our model. This helped since we didn't want to load in our images everytime we made a minor change. We used a simple two-layer neureal network to start with. Our first model used the ReLU activation function.  </p>

## Results:
<p>The preliminary results from our baseline model shows that we get us a 62.5% accuracy when classifying images from the test set. This model incorporates our default settings. It has initial parameters we used to reshape each image (120 pixels for image height and 160 pixels for image length), and has our default network setup (a single hidden layer and the ReLU activation function).  </p>

<p>The first parameter we chose to vary was the image reshape settings, as we wanted to determine what was the smallest image size that allows us to still get decent results. We decided to fix the height/length ratio as 3:4 because we found most images in our dataset fit those proportions. We found that increasing the image size did not increase the accuracy, but when we decreased the image size (fixing that proportion), the accuracy eventually went down. For example, we tried 30:40 as the height/length settings, and this brought the accuracy down to 34%. We decided that 60:80 is the best proportions to use as it allows us to benefit from the highest accuracy without the image being too large. </p>

## Discussion:
<p>These results are decent, but could be improved upon. 62% accuracy is not sufficient for our task of classifying pneumonia images, as we want to be more sure that are model is correct in its predictions before using it in a real world setting. That said, we think that by continuing to vary the architecture of our network, we will find much better results. We think that integrating a convolutional layer, and varying the activation functions will lead us to significantly improved results. </p>

## Conclusion:
<p>We have identified the problem of trying to classify between x-rays of people who have pneumonia and of those who don’t. We have determined an approach to doing this by creating a neural network that will take in as input the image and classify it as a patient that has pneumonia or not. We decided to use a single layer and will work with the ReLU activation function, as well as specified image resize parameters as our baseline, and have determined that they are able to classify the image with a 62% accuracy with these default settings. The remaining portion of our project is playing around with these parameters and determining whether they make the classifications better or worse.  </p>

## References:
<p>Other than the following documentation for PyTorch, we did not consult any other resources so far. </p>

Documentation:

	1. Introduction: Summarize your project report in several paragraphs.
		a. What is the problem? For example, what are you trying to solve? Describe the motivation.
		
		b. Why is this problem interesting? Is this problem helping us solve a bigger task in some 			way? Where would we find use cases for this problem?
		c. What is the approach you propose to tackle the problem? What approaches make sense for 		this problem? Would they work well or not? Feel free to speculate here based on what we 		taught in class.
		d. Why is the approach a good approach compared with other competing methods? For 			example, did you find any reference for solving this problem previously? If there are, how does 		your approach differ from theirs?
		e. What are the key components of my approach and results? Also, include any specific 			limitations.
	2. Setup: Set up the stage for your experimental results.
		a. Describe the dataset, including its basic statistics.
		b. Describe the experimental setup, including what models you are going to run, what 			parameters you plan to use, and what computing environment you will execute on.
		c. Describe the problem setup (e.g., for neural networks, describe the network structure that 		you are going to use in the experiments).
	3. Results: Describe the results from your experiments.
		a. Main results: Describe the main experimental results you have; this is where you highlight 		the most interesting findings.
		b. Supplementary results: Describe the parameter choices you have made while running the 		experiments. This part goes into justifying those choices.
	4. Discussion: Discuss the results obtained above. If your results are very good, see if you could 	compare them with some existing approaches that you could find online. If your results are not as 	good as you had hoped for, make a good-faith diagnosis about what the problem is.
	5. Conclusion: In several sentences, summarize what you have done in this project.
	6. References: Put any links, papers, blog posts, or GitHub repositories that you have borrowed 	from/found useful here.
